        Title: Trump’s tariffs on Canada, Mexico coming into effect Saturday: White House
        Heading: Live updates
        URL: https://www.aljazeera.com/news/liveblog/2025/1/31/live-donald-trumps-tariff-threat-looms-large-for-mexico-canada
        Source: https://www.aljazeera.com/

        Content:
        ----------------------------------------
        # LIVE: Trump’s tariffs on Canada, Mexico will be imposed Feb 1 – White House
        SUMMARY:
        US President Donald Trump’s plan to impose 25-percent tariffs on Canada and Mexico will come into effect on Saturday, the White House confirms.
        Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and Mexican President Claudia Sheinbaum have said they are ready to respond if the tariffs are implemented.
        • US President Donald Trump’s plan to impose 25-percent tariffs on Canada and Mexico will come into effect on Saturday, the White House confirms.
        • Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and Mexican President Claudia Sheinbaum have said they are ready to respond if the tariffs are implemented.
        Trump has said that nothing can be done to halt upcoming tariffs on China, Mexico, and Canada, adding that the size of such duties could increase still further and that countries like Canada have treated the US “very unfairly”.
        He conceded that tariff costs are sometimes passed along to consumers but said he is not concerned that the financial markets may respond poorly to the decision.
        Here are a few highlights from our recent coverage of US politics and the Trump presidency:
        • Explainer: DC plane crash – What we know about the victims and ongoing probe
        • Watch: Trump insists Egypt and Jordan will take Palestinians from Gaza
        • Analysis: Hamas leaders say they are “ready” to talk with Trump. Do they trust him?
        • Watch: Canada, Mexico leaders brace for Trump’s tariffs
        • Opinion: Elon Musk is the X-factor in the new Trump administration
        And there’s plenty more content here.
        As we reported earlier, the White House has confirmed that it is going through with plans to impose steep tariffs on some of the US’s largest trade partners.
        Watch White House spokesperson Karoline Leavitt make the announcement below.
        In a social media post, the Canadian prime minister has reiterated his earlier comments that Canada is “ready with a forceful and immediate response” if the US moves forward with tariffs.
        “No one — on either side of the border — wants to see American tariffs on Canadian goods,” Trudeau wrote on X.
        Asked about the congested airspace in the Washington, DC, area, Terry Liercke, the vice president and manager of Reagan National Airport, says the Federal Aviation Agency (FAA) regulates air traffic, not the airport.
        Pressed on whether he voiced safety concerns to the FAA before the crash, Liercke said the airport works with the agency and is regulated by it, but did not directly answer the question.
        “The United States airspace is the safest in the world. Safety is one of our top priorities,” he said.
        Al Jazeera’s Jessica Washington reports from the Chinese capital, where uncertainty has prevailed this week before Trump’s tariffs deadline.
        See more in the video below.
        Here’s more of what Donnelly has told reporters:
        • Search teams have recovered dozens of bodies and are notifying the victims’ next of kin.
        • In order to retrieve the rest of the remains, authorities will need to remove the plane’s fuselage from the Potomac River.
        • Teams are expecting to receive more salvage equipment tomorrow to help with the search effort.
        • Law enforcement agents are “working as fast as we can” but cannot provide a timeframe for the operation.
        • More than 300 personnel are working on the scene at any time.
        That remains to be seen.
        The White House was tight-lipped earlier on possible exemptions to the tariffs it says are coming for Canada, Mexico and China tomorrow.
        Trump had said he was weighing issuing an exemption for Canadian and Mexican oil imports, but Leavitt – the White House spokesperson – said she had no information to share on the president’s decision on any potential carveouts.
        Trump also previously said a 10-percent tariff on Chinese imports would be on top of other import taxes charged on products from the country.
        An unnamed Trump administration official said earlier that any exemptions would be “few and far between”, the Reuters news agency reported.
        A study this month by the Peterson Institute for International Economics concluded that the 25-percent tariffs on Canada and Mexico and 10-percent tariffs on China “would damage all the economies involved, including the US”.
        We don’t know if [Trump’s tariffs are] going to be on all goods, but we do know that Mexico and Canada have said they are going to respond.
        If Canada decides to put tariffs on the oil it exports into the US, you could see gas prices really skyrocket.
        Trump likes to say that other countries pay for the tariffs, that they pay the US government. That’s not the case. The people who import the products have to pay the US government, so they raise prices on consumers.
        Canada has talked about targeting states that supported Trump [in the 2024 election]: oranges in Florida, washing machines in Michigan, dairy products in Wisconsin.
        So it could really impact the very people who voted for Trump, … but more broadly, you are going to see massive price increases when they retaliate all across the United States.
        As we reported earlier, the Trump administration has justified imposing tariffs against Canada by saying the country has failed to stop the flow of fentanyl into the US.
        But just how much fentanyl is actually coming from Canada?
        According to US Customs and Border Protection, authorities in the US seized 19.5kg (43lbs) of fentanyl at the northern border with Canada in the 2024 fiscal year.
        By comparison, US border authorities seized nearly 9,600kg (21,100lbs) of fentanyl at the southwestern border with Mexico.